okay when you make progress towards a
valued goal let's say we inhabit a
shared narrative and we're making
progress towards our mutual stated goal
and when we see ourselves making
progress we get a bit of a dopamine hit
could you say that the fundamental
reason
for the positively rewarding effect of
that movement forward is that as I move
forward towards a goal I decrease the
entropy that still remains between me
and the goal and so is even that reward
is even that movement forward readable
as an entropy reduction I mean it's it's
almost written into the the mathematical
meaning of the word so if entropy just
is uncertainty and as I get close to
resolving that uncertainty getting my
fruit juice pleasing my wife or you know
being able to watch the news uh you know
if it's an epistemic reward it is just
expected surprise just is the
uncertainty and the closer you get the
the more
um the less uncertain you are and all
they have been suggests exactly as you
say it's dopamine
foreign
[Music]
hello everyone
thank you for tuning in to
watch and listen I have the great
privilege today of being able to talk
with Dr Carl friston
as a
in addition let's say
in a signal addition to the recent
conversation I had with Andrew huberman
Dr Carl friston is arguably the world's
most renowned neuroscientist a professor
at University College London
he is one of the world's leading
authorities on brain Imaging ninety
percent of the work published in fields
employing such Imaging relies
on methods he pioneered Dr friston is
also well known for his work on many of
the topics we will discuss today work I
find even more exciting at least
conceptually speaking than his work on
brain Imaging
we will discuss
the ideas that Concepts and precepts
categories that's another way of
thinking about it bind free energy or
entropy the idea of computation
especially the kind of computation
that's
approximates brain function as
hierarchical the theory of predictive
coding and active inference
welcome Dr friston it's very good of you
to agree to talk to me on this podcast
I'm really looking forward to it that's
a great pleasure to be here thank you
so let me start Maybe by helping people
understand this idea of
hierarchical computation and
The Binding of entropy and so if you
could walk through that briefly then
I'll ask some questions if that seems
appropriate
yeah sure
um The Binding of free energy and
entropy that that sounds delightfully
Freudian uh and I don't mean that in a
sort of uh
disparaging sense I think that some of
the tourisms and the insights of that
era
um have now proved themselves in modern
formulations of computation information
processing sense making in the brain
um and one nice link there is to think
of free energy as surprise
so one way of looking at the way that we
make sense of our world bringing
explanations Concepts categories Notions
um to the table that provide the best
explanation for the Myriad of Sensations
to which we are exposed is to see that
process as a process of minimizing
surprise so binding free energy I think
can be read very simply as minimizing
surprise but of course to be surprised
you have to have something you predicted
you have to have a violation of
predictions so immediately you're in the
game now of predictive processing uh
predicting
what would I see if the world out there
was like this and then using the ensuing
prediction errors to adjust your beliefs
and update your beliefs in the service
of minimizing those prediction errors or
minimizing that surprise or minimizing
minimizing that free energy and you uh
artfully introduce the notion of
hierarchy you know in that question
which um I think speaks to another
fundamental point that in making sense
of the world in making those good
predictions we have to have an internal
model sometimes called A World model a
model that can generate what I would
have seen if this was the State of
Affairs out there and that notion of a
generative model I think is quite key
and holds the attribute of hierarchy
simply in the sense that we live in a
deeply structured World very Dynamic
world a world Compares larger creatures
like ourselves that has this sort of
hierarchy call nested structure that has
to be part of the models that we bring
to the table to understand it
post-modernism is tearing our world
apart the one thing that may be able to
unite us is a mass return to Our
judeo-christian Roots at the individual
level that means developing our prayer
life there's a ton of literature out
there on the benefits of secular New Age
mindfulness meditation but what isn't
talked about nearly enough is the power
of a consistent prayer life that's where
hallow comes into play hallow is the
number one Christian Prayer app in the
U.S and the number one Catholic app in
the world hallow features over 5 000
prayers and meditations including daily
prayers to help you build a habit of
prayer and gratitude Bible reflections
with Jeff cavins and father Mike Schmitz
to help you grow in knowledge and
understanding meditations to help you
prepare for sleep and rest each day
reflections with Bishop Baron and much
more use hallow as a foundational tool
to grow in gratitude and character each
and every day try it free for three
months by going to hallow.com Jordan
that's hallow.com Jordan ground yourself
in fundamental truths with hallow today
okay so I encountered these ideas I
would say first reading a book back in
1982 by a man named Jeffrey gray who was
influenced by Norbert Viner and by
General cybernetic Theory and he
regarded the hippocampus as at least as
part of the central part of the brain
involved in contrasting
expectation let's say the way you expect
the world to lay itself out with the
worry the world is actually laying
itself out indicating that surprise was
a uh
what was the prodroma to anxiety and
that anxiety in some sense was an
indicator of the magnitude between
the magnitude of mismatch between
expectation and reality so I want to ask
you a couple of questions about that
because
I thought a lot about gray and I I
thought about gray for like 40 years
after reading his book and also as a
consequence of encountering your ideas
much later
um
the the cybernetic model of expectation
is predicated on the idea that you lay
out an expectation on the world and the
expectation is a model and then you have
incoming sensory data and the sensory
data is the world and that now and then
there's a mismatch between the sensory
data and the expectation and then you
have to modify either the representation
or the action pattern to reduce that
that mismatch but then I thought well
wait a second there's a there's a weird
there's a weird lack in that formulation
it's twofold number one it isn't obvious
to me that it's expectation
it seems to me that it's more likely to
be desire and that's a useful
transformation of conceptualization
because if you use the word desire
rather than the word expectation
you can infer that the models that are
being contrasted against the real world
are Mortals of motivation rather than
cold cognitive computation
and so for example if I'm interacting
with a woman who I'm romantically
interesting interested in I'm attempting
to bring about the realization of my
desire not my expectation and what I'm
and that's under the pressure let's say
of of of uh of the of the demand for
sexual reproduction and so the
motivational State grips the desire
the desire manifests itself is a fantasy
and then the that motivation is the
minimization of the discrepancy between
the actual world and the fantasy and
then so it's not exactly an expectation
because it's more Dynamic and alive and
then one more uh I hate to hammer you
with all of this right at the beginning
but one more issue on that front is um
the error because you could imagine and
I'm interested in how this matches your
hierarchical concept
if I make a mistake such that I don't
minimize the relationship between what's
happening and my fantasy one of the
mistakes I might make is a mistake of
perception not expectation or desire
because I might be seeing the situation
wrong and so it seems to me that it's
more realistic to say that what you're
doing is minimizing the mismatch between
a model of what's Happening
not this not sensory data itself but a
model of the of the pre of the unfolding
present contrasted with a fantasy and
that the mismatch is what indicates
surprise or and or entropy now I know
that's a lot of questions to answer at
the same time but that whole set of
objections makes up a pattern
it does and despite the fact you
introduce a whole bunch of really
important Concepts there I think it was
nicely introduced and you know
um in a coherent way so I'm just trying
to remember all the exciting things you
need to brought to the table and so yeah
Jeffrey gray a great thinker
um in my um memory sort of um famed for
understanding latest inhibition and sort
of you know how you use these surprise
or these mismatches or these
um these uh prediction errors and it's
interesting that you know you speak to
his conceptual roots in uh cybernetics
because there's a very very close
connection between the things that we're
talking about and the early formulations
of cybernetics by people like Ross Ashby
so there's this good regulator theorem
which I think you know if if your your
listeners don't know about I think
they'd like it I think you you know you
would like a lot it's just the notion
and provable notion that to control an
environment you have to have a model of
that environment to you know to be able
to couple with to engage with the
environment the degrees of freedom of
your model have to match those of the
kind of environment in which you are in
which you're operating so it was a a
deep connection there the other thing
well many things you brought you you uh
mentioned there you use the word
fantasies a lot and I think that's quite
important because very often
um I sell the brain as a fantastic organ
literally because it is in the game of
generating the right kind of fantasies
and these are the fantasies these are
the motivated expectations that drive
our Behavior but in noting that in
noting that you've also in a big move
and an important move I know it's a move
you know you want to make in terms of
our conversation but just a
contextualize why that is such an
important move you're talking about
motivation you know how our perception
and action are all contextualized by
motivation and what we desire and what
we want and what the preferred outcomes
of our of our Acts that's I think I
think sort of the cracks and we're
probably the focus on much of what we're
going to be talking about but just to
say that vanilla predictive processing
and predictive coding does not deal with
that it just deals with sense making so
it's usually in the moment as soon as
you bring decisions and choices and
actions to the table you're immediately
in the game now of making inferences
about the future the future that has yet
to be observed so there are no
prediction errors it's just your
expected surprise your expected entropy
or expected free energy or you're
expected discrepancies between what you
fantasize should happen or what you
prefer to happen and what you anticipate
given your best sense making at the
moment so I think that inactive aspect
that that choice really does profoundly
you know change the game and takes us
from simple sense making into the world
of choice and decision making and
motivation so um mathematically the way
that I would
articulate that as a physicist would be
okay if we're in the game of minimizing
surprise and this mismatch this is
discrepancy that you were describing in
the moment then presumably I will now
choose the things that I do
in order to minimize the expected
surprise in the future and the nice
thing about articulating it like that is
that the expected surprise
mathematically is just entropy
so entropy uncertainty
and I'm using entropy and uncertainty
synonymously here
they are the mathematical statement of
the surprise I expect when I haven't
actually seen the outcome yet so in many
senses what you can say is that we are
motivated to resolve our uncertainty and
that can be sort of if you like carved
into two ways of minimizing uncertainty
it can either be through choosing those
behaviors that resolve uncertainty in
the sort of folk psychological sense you
know watching the news looking over
there to see whether you know my
fantasies about the cause of that that
visual flutter in the periphery of my
vision was what I thought it was was it
a bird or a butterfly but I think
there's another side well I know there's
another side to that technically an
expected information again
um or an epistemic value
um and that's of course I I will avoid
putting myself in surprising situations
being very cold physiologically or being
unloved or being embarrassed or anything
that I would find surprising about
myself
I will minimize my expected Surprise by
avoiding those kinds of things and I
think that's that that's what you know
my reading of what you were saying
touches exactly on on that
[Music]
a shocking number of stocks are in the
red you may think you're doing all the
things right but in this volatile
economy many of our portfolios are just
not looking good why according to the
largest banks and firms in the world
people aren't diversifying the right way
the average annual return of the classic
60 40 portfolio is down by nearly 20
percent this year Goldman Sachs just
released a shocking report declaring the
60 40 doomed for the next decade and
announcing a radical reallocation from
stocks entirely Goldman will instead be
investing in real tangible assets
specifically Fine Art the last time
inflation was this High some segments of
the Art Market appreciated more than
real estate and even gold at an
astounding 33 per year on average that's
why this show has partnered with
Masterworks Masterworks results have
been exceptional six exits for an
average net return of 29 to investors
even during covid and in a bear Market
as a result massworks has had to acquire
and release more art on their platform
to meet demand but you can skip the
waitlist by going to massworks.com and
using promo code jbp that's
masterworks.com promo code jbp or click
the link in the description see
important disclosures at massworks.com
CD
I think people hem the people hem
themselves in in their actions even in
once people you see this clinically as
once people develop a conceptualization
of themselves which is a box in some
sense to put their variability in
they'll sometimes simplify themselves in
terms of their range of action merely so
they don't surprise themselves
and so they artificially constrain the
range of their potential behavior and
that can become maladaptive if their
conception of themselves is too narrow
that would be a good example of a Miss
in some sense of a misperception of the
self
right it's a narrowing of possibility
and so I should maybe try to explain to
people a little bit more about this
issue of entropy and
so there there's this notion that's come
out of theory of perception that
any set of objects or any object for
that matter
can is different from any other object
and the same as any other object in a
multitude or even a near infinite number
of ways and so you could think I always
think of two goblets standing on a table
and you might say Well they're identical
but they're not and you can tell they're
not if you wanted to paint them in a
photorealistic manner you'd find that
the surface of one goblet is very much
unlike the surface of another and you'd
have to render that at high resolution
in order to represent it accurately on a
canvas and then they differ in weight
and and they differ in in the regularity
of the surface and they might differ in
age there's all sorts of
differences between them that you might
not think are germane or relevant but
that's really the issue is why do you
regard some similarities as crucial and
some differences as irrelevant and so
here's a here's something I'd like to
run by you so would it be reasonable to
say imagine a hierarchy of perception
and so and conception so the idea is
well
two goblets are identical if I can drink
out of either of them
using the same pattern of perception and
action
so
it so that that's kind of an indication
of the entropy constrained by the notion
of wishing to drink
any two things are substitutable as long
as they leave me with the ability to
drink as an axiom of my current action
set
and that's that's something like a maybe
a computational definition of
resemblance
because I I can't understand how you can
bind resemblance otherwise if any two
things differ in near infinite number of
ways they differ in terms of the
microstates that they might be composed
of that would be a way of thinking about
it from the perspective of entropy
Theory
so there were sub if they're
substitutable within a higher
hierarchical conception then their
identical perceptually and conceptually
does that so do you know the the change
blindness experiments that that it was
Dan Simon yes managed at Harvard yeah
well that's a good example right so I'll
just run through one of those
experiments for the people listening so
imagine you put a camera on a two-story
building and it's looking down over a
university yard and now imagine that you
have tourists walking through the yard
and uh
um an undergraduate research associate
comes up to a tourist with a map and
asks the tourist to help him find his
way and while that's happening
some other experimental compatriots walk
between the person who's asking for
directions and the tourist carrying a
door two of them and the person asking
the question grabs the door hidden from
The Tourist and continues walking with
the door and the person who was carrying
the door stands there and continues
asking the question with the map and
what Simon found was that
the large largest percentage of people
the majority of people do not notice
that the student has been swapped in the
middle of the conversation and the
reason for that has to be that
the perception of the student by the
tourist is something like generic
student asking for directions and any
student who's asking for directions at
that point will fulfill that
function or act as a player in that
story and so there's no reason to be
surprised by the transformation even
though quote it's a different person and
that seems to add Credence to this
notion of a theory of identity or
resemblance does that seem reasonable to
you it seems very reasonable
um so mathematically I think you could
you could you would describe that
exactly in terms of finding those latent
States or categories or structures or
resemblance that are conserved of
different contexts and that enables you
to have a simple but apt for purpose
model of your world so if you can find
the causal structure that is as simple
as possible that provides an adequate
explanation of your sensorium then you
know that that is the good model I mean
literally as a statistician that that
would be the model with the greatest
evidence the accuracy minus the
complexity you also brought something
interesting uh into the conversation
again
um which was what I would read as
affordance do you like sort of gibsonian
Notions of a foot yeah so you were
saying you bet the the this you know
this ability to extract the latent
structure the essence the uh the
resemblances that are conserved over
different contexts so that you know they
have the at very low levels of the
hierarchy these microscopic or detailed
differences but at higher levels of the
hierarchy
um they are the same kind of thing they
have the same affordance I sit on this I
drink this I love that I don't like that
um
what you've done though again in terms
of talking about affordances bring
action and you know to the fall you know
I can perceive lots of inferences in my
world and you know there are there are
categories and the there are exemplars
of particular categories and I can
unpack that hierarchically and many
people think that's how the the visual
hierarchy the cortical hierarchy that
subtends or subserves uh visual
perception and visual synthesis is
organized but what you're saying is this
also holds true in the way that I plan
to act and the outcomes of those actions
and all of these uh if I get those
invariances out then they are the right
kinds of affordances that speak to my
model of the way I'm going to behave in
the situation putting Center Stage the
self model yo what am I what kind of
thing am I and what will I do in this
situation and is my model good enough is
it too rigid is it you know should it be
more flexible all these are crucial
questions in terms of updating not just
your beliefs about what you're doing and
the context in which you're operating
but the kind of thing you are and
whether you've got the right simple
explanations whether there should be
more complex or or or or simpler
right and so the the optimal simple
explanation is the least complex
affordance necessary for the operation
at hand and so then we could we could
talk about affordances a little bit so
people who are watching and listening
might think that you
see the object and infer the meaning but
the theory of affordances would suggest
that you see the meaning and infer the
object or something like that it
reverses it and that what you see first
is something like functional utility but
I think you can bring both those
positions together if you think that
what we see in the world are patterns
that have functional utility now there's
all sorts of patterns that don't have
functional utility or that only have
potential functional utility and that
might be you might consider patterns
that don't have specified functional
utility as something like the infinite
domain of potential empirical facts
if a fact is something like the accurate
identification of a pattern that exists
stably across contexts but then we can't
see all the set of all possible facts
because it's way too large and so we
want to reduce that further to that set
of patterns that offer us a grip on the
world and
um Gibson who wrote an ecological
approach to visual perception talked a
lot about affordances tools and
obstacles in particular if I remember
correctly but I'm wondering as well is
it is the domain of affordance here's a
way of conceptualizing the domain of
affordance it's tool those things that
you can get a grip on the world
with and move forward towards a desired
goal obstacles so things that get in
your way of different size and then
pathways
and the pathways and some so I would say
the pathways are littered with tools and
obstacles
and the description of a pathway that's
littered with tools and obstacles that's
a story
and so these these it looks to me like
those hierarchical conceptual boxes are
best conceptualized as something like
stories
if they're an amalgam of affordance and
pattern then they're not either just an
object or just the subject they're the
bringing of the two together and the
story is where the pattern and the
purpose meet that's a that's a way of
thinking about it yeah and I would think
maybe even when you perceive a tool it
seems to me that what you're perceiving
is something like a micro story you know
like if I perceive this pen
say well that's obviously it's an
objective fact that this pen exists and
it is insofar as the pen is a stable
pattern in time and space
but it's the function of the pen that
makes it a pen and gives the unity
that it gives the unity to the
perception because you might ask well
why is the pen a pen this way and a pen
this way and also a pen this way and
speak well because because it's it's
objective characteristics transform
tremendously when it's moved or when
it's illuminated differently but its
function remains constant and so I think
even an affordance is a micro story
and so a tool is a positive it's a
comedy that's a way of thinking about it
a tool is a comedy and uh an obstacle is
a tragedy
and and we lay out the world like that
even at the levels of our fundament even
at the level of our fundamental
perceptions
is there any what do you think of the
ideas of a concept or a percept as a as
a story because you see the reason I
like that the reason I think this is so
important is that there's an entire
literature on Narrative of course the
entire literature on literature is about
narrative
and if it is the case that our
fundamental concepts our narrative in
in their in their in their origin and
their nature then
that allows us to lay the narrative
World on top of the objective world and
I think that's a
well it would be lovely if that was a
possibility
it would alleviate the uh
the terrible tension between them and of
course the question comes up was what's
the best narrative but
that's something we can also talk about
in terms of hierarchical processing
yeah I think some deep truths are
um a number of ways I could sort of
paraphrase what you've just said so this
notion of microstories and narratives I
think that is exactly the plans into the
future that we were talking about before
that you know choosing the right ones
um and
mathematically you can think of that
exactly as you articulate it as as a
path
um one perspective on that is that of
Richard Feynman in terms of the
pathological formulation of quantum
electrodynamics where he was playing
exactly the same game finding the path
of least action the path with the least
obstacles the path that is the most
fluent the most
eager syntonic
um leading to exactly what we talked
about before either the information gain
or avoiding surprising outcomes which
you know I would read as the obstacles I
don't go there that's not the kind of
thing that I'm in so
um if you if you read
our active engagement with the world or
active influence just as a process of
committing to the right paths the right
plans the right narratives the right
micro stories I think that is the
essence of
um
sentient behavior and existence so I you
know I'm I would be put myself very much
um or I would certainly find it easy to
commit to that kind of formulation
I think a lot a lot of other people
would as well in different fields so
what you're talking about you you
mentioned before about you know all the
facts that are noble and yet we only
register and recognize those that matter
essential variables for example change
blindness is a nice example of That You
Don't See student of a particular
identity personal identity change it's
just a student you only see and you only
model and rehearse and Sample the world
using the level the simple level
explanation that is
apt for getting those right paths
forward yes well and it would be lovely
if if your hierarchical
conceptualization consisted of
micro stories let's say that were
flexible enough so that they would apply
across a very wide range of microstate
Transformations because then you can use
the same simple model in all sorts of
different situations so you might say
well if you could extract out a
universal ethic
for dealing with people
then you could apply that ethic to
everyone that you met and then and that
idea might help us triangulate in on
what might constitute a universal higher
order ethical narrative and if you
imagine that
my interactions with people are
generally constrained by the necessity
of iterating the interactions across
time
and then you might say by the additional
constraint of iterating the interactions
across time so that they increase in
their utility
and so then you might say well how do
you have to treat someone
or everyone for that matter so that that
reality makes itself manifest As you
move forward into the future and I would
say well that looks like something like
genuine altruistic reciprocity
no friends DeWall I had a chance to talk
to France to wall about his work with
chimpanzees you know when chimpanzee
alpha males are often parodied as
dominant in a sort of marxist sense
power driven and it's the most dominant
male chimp so the one with the most
physical prowess the biggest tyrant in
some sense who gets to dominate all the
other chimps and who in consequence has
preferential reproductive access
and so it's a theory of power and social
structure and reproduction all tangled
up into one but the problem with that is
it's not true
so dewal has shown very very clearly
that
first of all sometimes the alpha chimps
so to speak can be the smallest male in
The Troop
frequently he's allied with a powerful
female
and he is generally the most reciprocal
individual in the troop very concerned
with the long-term maintenance of social
relations and very good at making peace
not war now that doesn't mean he doesn't
have
let's call it power at his disposable
disposal especially in coalitions if
necessary but DeWalt has shown very
clearly that the alpha chimps who rely
on Power and force are very likely to
rule over an unstable polity and to meet
an extremely violent end in the
relatively short term
and so if if your fantasy about the
future let's say is motivated by
underlying motivational state it could
be hunger it could be thirst it could be
uh
um sexual need it could be rage
it could be the desire to make anxiety
decrease
and you can imagine that
there are ways of interacting in the
world that
satisfy multiple motivational
States simultaneously
and then you could imagine that they
that those modes of being satisfied
multiple states of motivation
simultaneously in a social context so
also for other people and then you could
say and that
and that make that occur
As It iterates Forward into the future
and then you could say well you want to
extract out a representation that allows
you all those advantages simultaneously
and it looks to me like something maybe
that's marked here's some hypotheses
it's marked by the sense of active
engagement that you might have in a good
conversation
it's marked by the sense of the
emergence of the spirit of play and
Jacques panxip has detailed out the
psychophysiological structures
underlying the play circuit it would
underlie something like maximal
no optimize stress so you talked about
minimizing predictive error but here's a
variant what if you optimize predictive
error so that you lay out a fantasy
on the future and then work so that
there's just enough predictive error so
that you encounter something you don't
expect at a micro level
small enough that you can manage it but
large enough so that it expands the
confines of your hierarchical
presuppositions and maybe you do that
see I was thinking about that
relationship to play because if you're
on a team and you're playing against a
well-matched opponent
the opponent pushes you right to the
limit of your skill not past it right so
it's not too stressful but but it isn't
exactly in that situation that surprises
minimize it's more like
it's more like a little entropy is
allowed to enter the system
at just enough
rate and intensity so that you can push
your development in a manner that
doesn't stress you too badly
physiologically
yeah so you've you've you've came
brought it about sort of four really
important uh themes here the two key
things that you've brought to the table
there were were sort of putting sentient
creatures together so you're talking
about social interactions now and social
hierarchism and sense making when the
other the thing I'm making sense about
is also trying to make sense of me I
think that's a really important sort of
um and challenging
um sort of um move there you've also
brought to this
um sort of highlighted this Paradox that
you know we might be in the game or we
might be seen as in the game of Trying
to minimize our surprise minimize our
prediction errors and yet we seek out
novelty
so I think there's a fundamental Paradox
there that needs resolving I think
you've you know in your setting up of
the um of the issue I think you've
implicitly resolved it there is I think
a very simple way of resolving that that
comes back to this sort of um
isomorphism between expected surprise
and uncertainty and I notice you also
use the word angst and anxiety to my
mind uncertainty just is a state of or
recognized as a state of angst or
anxiety so you know
that that sort of
um
imperative to minimize expected surprise
just is
choosing or can be complied with by
choosing those plans that minimize
uncertainty and what would that look
like it would basically look like
epistemic of responding to epistemic
affordances that resolve that
uncertainty so I think that's the kind
of surprise that we aspire to it's the
novelty that affords the opportunity to
resolve uncertainty and thereby resolve
angst and if that's true then taking it
to your context how would I do that if I
was in a social hierarchy of chimpanzees
or was it in any social setting
um in one sense the simplest way to
resolve my surprise and make the world
as predictable as possible well in one
would initially be to resolve my
uncertainty About You by asking you the
right kinds of questions that allows me
to sort of put you in a particular
category in one of my narratives my
pro-social narratives about the kinds of
people that I can talk about but also
ultimately I'm going to try make you
like me or make me like you because the
closer we are that if we can share the
same narratives and the same language
right then together we're mutually
predictable so that that mathematically
would be so like a generalized synchrony
but from the from a social uh social
neuroscience perspective on static
interactions it's basically aligning
ourselves so that we come to know each
other and that we can dance and
synchronize and exchange and you know
after a while I don't need to ask you
any more questions and you don't need to
ask me any more questions we are now on
the same page singing from the same hymn
sheet the same generative model the same
world model the same kinds of narratives
having said that of course there is also
in the background the putative or
potential novelty of finding out what
somebody's not like me like you know so
so you know I I think asking questions
about the right kinds of narrative that
resolve uncertainty responding to
epistemic affordance novelty seeking
information seeking whilst at the same
time still avoiding those surprising
states of loss or
um physiological extremists
um
put that into a social context and I
think you you know you've got some
really interesting questions and
possibly a structure and a framework to
understand social organization and
um and sort of information exchange and
self-organization not at the level of
just the individual negotiating
negotiating with his or her body that
negotiate negotiating with another
individual with a very similar kind of
body
I spend a lot of time
studying Jean Piaget and his description
of how cognitive structures organize
themselves across time and
you might imagine a two-year-old as a
collection of micro narratives Each of
which are driven by a somewhat
independent motivational state
and so two-year-olds will cycle between
being too hot and too cold and too tired
and too playful and too enthusiastic and
too anxious without any real overarching
integration and they start to manifest
that ability to integrate those already
integrated motivational states which are
probably in large part hypothalamically
controlled they start to be able to
integrate those into a continuous
narrative through time and in different
locales at two and so then they start to
be able to play
by themselves
and so
but it's at three or thereabouts when
they can adopt a shared narrative with
someone else so a little boy and a
little girl might get together and the
little boy will offer to play or the
little girl and say would you like to
play house and so that specifies the
goal
and then
the little girl has to say yes it has to
be voluntary and then the little boy
might say well I'll be the dad and you
be the mom
and then they can integrate their two
identities within that overarching
concept and so they can develop Mutual
understanding that way
and it's partly because
you said earlier that the best way to
make someone else predictable and you to
them which is also equally useful in
some sense is to be inhabited by the
same conceptual structure
and that's sort of what we do when we
decide to play a game together it's like
here's the game here are the principles
by which we're going to operate those
are the rules of the game and if you're
operating by those principles
and I'm operating by those principles
simultaneously
then we're going to share perceptual
reality because that's instantiated in
relationship to the game and we're going
to share emotional response and so
I can now predict you if you're playing
the same game merely by reading off of
me
because the same and I think this is
what we do when we go to a movie
and we watch the hero
we adopt his hierarchy of attentional
prioritization
and then we can feel the same emotions
because we're in the same state and we
really are like neurophysiologically
we're in an analogous State and then the
understanding comes not from me deriving
inferences about the character's
motivations because of his actions but
by me adopting his goal or his story and
then reading off the emotions I have
which are now isomorphic with his
foreign
and I think children are doing the same
thing when they play a game and I would
say that you and I insofar as we're
playing the same game in this
conversation are very likely to remain
predictable to one another and also to
occupy the same emotional state
simultaneously similar at least similar
enough so we're not
jarring and off-putting to each other
yes I would I wanted to say about it so
the shared narrative is
uh I think that's a perfect example of a
shared narrative
um and you you crucially point out that
you know you're talking about theory of
mind and one of the easiest ways to get
to theory of mind is just to commit to
the hypothesis that you are very much
like me so what I would feel if I sensed
what uh you sensed is going to be a very
good proxy for uh my inference about
your feelings and of course you know
making inferences about you just is
um theory of mind I I also wonder
whether you were going to develop that
argument
um
um sort of you know almost pre
um stages of uh PR jettin development
just to
um how a newborn infant starts to make
sense of its world and the Very
emergence of selfhood that self is
distinct from mum or the rest of the
world
um getting into Notions of uh motor
babbling you know babies that will
rattle their uh you know their toys to
say yes I caused that as opposed to mum
causing that yeah so you know I think
that what you're talking about
um the the Newmont being the ability to
actually recognize oh you are another
that is like me and if we can share the
same narrative then there is some
um not only a a deep connection and a
communication but also very
sophisticated theory of mind that would
be the geneumont but on Route you've
actually
um described a mechanism as uh say a
structure learning learning the
structure of this this hierarchical
um world model self model
that entails the emergence of selfhood
in and of itself you know in order for
me for us to take turns we both have to
have this fantasy that I am me and you
are you and I have to recognize I am me
and you are you and we have to take
turns so now it's your turn
right so those are the axiomatic
preconditions of that game and the
axiomatic preconditions some of them are
you exist as a separate entity and I
exist as a separate entity but we can be
joined together in a shared vision and
one of the just for those of you who are
watching and listening to understand is
if this is true and we establish a share
two people establish a shared narrative
and that shared narrative simplifies the
world and that simplification constrains
entropy then that shared narrative
constrains Terror
and so you might say well why is it
possible to be calm in the presence of
someone else given their infinite
complexity and also their almost
infinite capacity for Mayhem and the
answer well it is well insofar as the
two of you establish and inhabit a
shared narrative then all that entropic
complexity is constrained by the desire
let's say to keep the shared narrative
intact
and then you might also point out that
if you and I our shared narrative might
be it would be worthwhile to have an
interesting conversation because both of
us might learn something and we might
have the opportunity to bring a bunch of
other people along for the ride which
seems like a good additional bonus and
so we both come to this conversation
with that story in mind and then we can
play the game as a consequence and even
though we don't know each other
because we assume Goodwill on each
other's part not only are we not anxious
in each other's presence apart from
whatever additional relevant features
might have to do with being on a podcast
but we can also take some pleasure and
Joint movement towards the shared goal
because
the dopamine system to me seems to
indicate progress towards
a shared
to the instantiation of a vision it's
something like that and then if you're
acting in a manner that makes the vision
appear to me making itself manifest and
that's rewarding
and that reward has a uh an existential
element a phenomenological element you
can feel it feels good but then the
dopamine what it does neurochemically
seems to be to track the neural systems
that were activated
just prior to the manifestation of the
success and make them grow
and so once you establish a shared
narrative if you negotiated successfully
you also increase the probability that
the neural architecture manifesting that
Vision making that manif Vision manifest
in skill and apprehension is more likely
to dominate in the future more likely to
take priority in the future
yeah you
no no go ahead well no I'm just noting
you've not you've now sort of brought in
dopamine
um as an important neurochemical
um
um part of the anatomy of sense making
and uh and exchange so I just wanted to
acknowledge that because
um
um in my world
um the way that one might describe that
and uh interpret all the empirical
evidence is very much along the line of
this notion of pursuing a narrative and
then this instance a dyadic narrative or
a narrative about how I should behave in
a dadic context And if every if I
resolve my uncertainty and just to Open
brackets just to uh conduct your nice
observation about we might learn
something
um from this exchange I think that
speaks to that to that novelty bonus
you're talking about a bonus and
certainly in machine learning this
Information Gain this epistemic
affordance that is part of the good
narratives and the good paths into the
future and would um be seen exactly as
this sort of novelty bonus so that is
part of the reward so if in this
exchange we are both
um realizing you use the word
instantiating instantiating or realizing
through committing to the right
narratives literally A Narrative of
verbal exchange or linguistic exchange
here
um and that secures a result resolution
of uncertainty about what you think or
indeed about what I think
um then that will be
um rewarding in the sense it's
minimizing uncertainty minimizing
expected surprise minimizing if you like
entropy in the sense that you originally
introduced it so I think that's an imp
there's a you know there's an important
if you like
um generic thing uh concept that you
bring to the table here that all these
um ways of looking at good narratives
and good engagement with the world I
think are all very internally consistent
especially when placed in terms of
interpersonal interactions and they also
actually have biophysical
violets in our brains and you've
identified a really important one which
which is dopamine and we could talk
about and I suspective you would want to
talk about what's special about dopamine
related to all the other chemicals that
are responsible for message passing and
belief propagation and sort of getting
the
um the hierarchical fantasies aligned in
order to explain what I'm sensing what
I'm hearing and indeed what I'm saying
so so do you do you want to elaborate on
the role of dopamine I'd be more than
happy to hear what you have to say about
that so because we talk about a surprise
minimization but this is this is reward
and reinforcement and so and and and the
and the propagation of growth and that
can happen artificially I mean if you
dose yourself with cocaine
you can produce a cocaine seeking
narrative that's instantiated in your
brain and that's actually what
constitutes the addiction in some sense
it's a cocaine-seeking personality
that's a uni-dimensional monster that
now comes to dominate your
neurophysiology in conditions of
deprivation that's a very bad idea it's
you you've you've you've generated an
internal parasite that's fed on this
externally applied chemical but so if
you could elaborate on the role of
dopamine I'd be more than happy to hear
what you what you have to say about that
yeah no absolutely
um just picking up on that nice notion
of um a cocaine addiction being sort of
parasitic I I think that's absolutely
right it's sort of almost as if there's
been a short circuit a hijacking of the
normal mechanisms that we would
um you know our brains would certainly
bring um bring to the fore to actually
choose and register the choice of the
right path for board so for me reward
just is that minimizational realization
uh minimization of expected surprise or
uncertainty so it is intrinsically
rewarding to resolve uncertainty and to
secure and seek out those novel things
or avoid those UNS unfamiliar
uncharacteristic obstacle-like States
um that you know states that do not
characterize me so I you know dopamine I
think
um read like that just is the fact you
have resolved uncertainty so if I get a
cue in the world
um say a conditioned stimulus that tells
me oh I now know exactly what I'm going
to do next I'm going to if I'm a little
monkey in an experimental Paradigm I'm
going to receive a drop of juice and I'm
going to drink that
um if I am um
somebody engaging a social conversation
then I know exactly where this
conversation is going that's great I
know exactly what I want to say
um so I think that's when you get the
dopamine blush that resolution of
uncertainty suddenly you see the path
forward clearly and it is exactly and
I'm using path in your sense of the
micro story that the micro story that's
responding to the affordances what's
special about dopamine though
um well it's a neuromodulator so it
plays the role in the brain as not
um of sending information from this
neuronal structure to this neural
structure or this uh set of neurons this
set of neurons but greasing the pathway
by setting the excitability of the game
by being the
um the chemical mechanism by which you
will switch on this set of messages or
that method instead of messages another
way of saying that is it sensitizes for
example let's come back to yourself
hierarchical structure that the the
micro stories are informing or perhaps
the mismatch at the lowest level the
prediction is at the lowest level are
inducing belief updates at a higher
level to get to these simpler more
abstracted inferences you were talking
about before but how much does a high
level listen to the low level and how
much does a low level inherit or
um respond to top-down constraints
afforded by your simple high-level
abstractions which could of course be be
the narrative so chemicals like dopamine
and I and I wonder whether you also want
to talk about things like serotonin in
relation to things such as depression
and learn helplessness all of these
neurochemicals have one thing in common
their role in the brain is just to
sensitize one set of neuronal
representations to messages from another
set of neural neural representations
when placed in your hierarchical context
that can have a profound effect on the
balance between how much you're
attending to what's going on out there
so your the micro uh the microstructure
the low level sensory uh um
constructions that
um
um or categorizations that say you you
might think are being played out in the
early visual cortex or the primary
auditory cortex relative to your
um coherent deeply structured narratives
about me in a particular world so you
know I would imagine that you know a lot
where you might want to go with this is
is just thinking well how might that go
wrong and um what would that look like
if I had an abnormality of these
neuromodulatory transmitter systems in
the brain and of course you've
highlighted one of the key uh or a key
abnormality that which is a juice
induced by drugs of abuse or misuse
nowadays such as cocaine so that's a I
think you know drug addiction is a
really good example of what tends to
happen if you mess with these really
important systems
yeah well cocaine addiction
prioritizes the micro behaviors
associated with cocaine
self-administration prioritizes those
over all other potential behavioral
microstates over all other stories and
it does that neurologically on the
serotonin front
so
here's here's a pattern of depressive
cognition and we you can think about it
as the collapse of a hierarchy
so let's say you have a tiff with your
wife
and if you're operating let's say
normally
in terms of your neurological hierarchy
you might say well you know I'm just
having an off day or I'm having an off
hour and it's only one little
upset it's only one little anomaly it's
only one little
surprise I can safely ignore it but that
isn't what a depressive person will
think a depressant person will think oh
my God I just had another fight with my
wife
I'm doing nothing but fighting with my
wife lately my marriage isn't going very
well I've always fought with my wife too
much in the past and I'm fighting a lot
with my friends I'm not a really good
person to get along with I mess up
everything I do I've always messed up
everything I do I'm gonna keep messing
up everything I do in the present
because that's what I'm like and there's
no hope at all for me to change in the
future
and you can see that an error that could
have been bounded at a low level which
is well maybe I didn't have enough to
eat in the last two hours and so I'm a
little irritable has cascaded through
the entire hierarchy of
self-conceptualization and so imagine
that
each level of the hierarchy has to be
protected against the propagation of
error messages from a lower level
and then imagine each level of the
hierarchy has a resistance level that's
set by something like the tonic level of
Serotonin so the higher the serotonin
level corresponding to higher Social
Status by the way the more error has to
accrue at a given level of analysis
before a message will propagate up the
hierarchical system
and so
one of the things my wife and I have
worked out in terms of modulating our
reactivity to each other and to other
people is well when should you respond
to a disruption in social communication
when should you call someone on it
and our answer is being something like
the rule of three that's fairly
typical of narrative descriptions of
such things
if it happens once you can ignore it
it's just random fluctuation if it
happens twice you could mark it but
still discount it
but if it happens three times it
establishes a pattern and then something
has to be called into question so I
might say if if I'm interacting with my
wife and it doesn't go well three times
in a row I might say to her
I tried to be friendly three times in a
row and I've been rebuffed what that
indicates to me is something else is
going on here
that's like a Freudian slip in some
sense it's like
I think this is what's happening I want
this to be happening but it's not
happening here's the evidence three
instances thus we have to reconfigure
the narrative that we're using to
structure the space and we have to say
well what actually is happening here
what needs to be resolved and so that's
a and then maybe and you don't say well
we were rude to each other three times
today therefore our marriage is over and
we're both terrible people because that
would be leaping too far up in the
hierarchy you might say well is there
something else going on in the
background that's disturbing you so that
you're more irritable in relationship to
me that's part of a different conceptual
structure and maybe the other person
will say well you know I I didn't have a
very good day at work I was arguing with
my boss he's a bit tyrannical then you
can go off on that narrative and try to
resolve it but
but you can see depression as the
collapse of that resistance of the
hierarchy to the propagation of Errors
upward
and so when you give people
serotonergic reuptake Inhibitors what
they seem to do arguably is make each
level of the hierarchy more resistant to
the propagation of upward error
and the reason I tied that into social
status is because we know that animals
that have higher Social Status and
therefore occupy a more secure position
in the social and environmental
hierarchy are more resistant to anomaly
partly because they can
rest comfortable in the supposition that
they're
superordinate status actually means that
they're globally safer they have better
social relations they have better access
to necessary environmental resources the
world isn't as dangerous a place
and so you can imagine that your brain
computes how
likely an error messages to propagate
upward partly by looking at your social
status which would be the value that
other people have attributed to you by
their distributed computation and it
does that with trait neuroticism which
is your own genetically mediated mostly
partially at least genetically mediated
initial
propensity for those error messages to
propagate up the hierarchy you might say
they're more likely to propagate up the
hierarchy the internal representational
hierarchy of women
and women are more sensitive to negative
emotion than men and I think the reason
for that is is because they have to take
care of infants
it makes sense for them to be more
sensitive to smaller errors of
prediction because the consequences for
someone who's truly vulnerable an infant
can be cataclysmic
and so anyways there's a lot in that but
that's
that's a relation a theory of the
relationship between hierarchical
processing of entropy and the proclivity
for depression
yeah there is a lot there
um but it all makes perfect sense
um from the point of view of
hierarchical inference in the brain
particularly hierarchical predictive
coding so if you'll indulge me I'm just
going to say exactly what you said
um but using slightly different words
because I I think that that notion that
you've just described and its
implications for things like depression
um has a lot of construct validity in
relation to sort of
um more machine learning uh artificial
intelligence formulations of this
hierarchical processing so one way of
articulating that Insight
um is to think of the the message
passing in a hierarchy that literally is
our brain under the rubric of predictive
coding so in this um in this sort of
framework or scheme the idea is that
each level of the hierarchy it receives
information from Below
and it tries to explain away
the information based upon top-down
predictions and that which cannot be
explained is ensuing prediction error so
these are the mismatches you're
referring to before and then these
prediction errors are used to revise
beliefs or representations sub-personal
beliefs or representations at the higher
level at the more abstract level until
the top-down predictions are more apt to
explain away what's going on below now
the key thing
um about this architecture well there
are a number of key things and we've
spoken in depth about about a number of
them
um but the framing like this then the
game of minimizing surprise the mate the
game of is just the game of minimizing
predictionaries but how are you doing
that well you're explaining away what's
going on down there based upon higher
level hypotheses or belief structures or
expectations or representations
um in your hierarchy
the key aspect of this sort of
um message passing scheme this
predictive coding scheme is that it
really matters how much weight you
afford to the prediction errors that are
passed and Ascend the hierarchy you use
the word sort of cascading up the
hierarchy and this is exactly the image
that a an engineer would have when
building a predictive coding machine and
the degree to which they Cascade up is
exactly proportional to the gain or the
sensitivity that is set by the
neuromodulators in this instance
serotonin so the resistance now is set
by
um having entrenched if you like beliefs
about this at this level of the
hierarchy relative to this level of
hierarchy that is mediated by decreasing
your sensitivity to the ascending
prediction errors so if I if I read your
um your cons well let's take depression
and I also like to talk about
psychedelics because they act upon
exactly the same neurotransmitter
systems but let's let's just take
um let's take depression which is a
particularly pernicious I think sort of
um
um set of narratives to find yourself in
because you know I'll just cut to the
Newmont of this argument that because
you know in many senses this um this
predictive coding formulation when put
in the context of
um me discovering and learning and
optimizing my models of the world is all
about accumulating evidence
um for my explanations that are updated
um in a way that minimize the prediction
errors but in accumulating evidence I
have to expose myself I have to choose
to expose myself to the world I have to
actively sense and go out there
depression is pernicious because of
course a lot of the symptoms of
depression
prevent you going and getting evidence
that you're not this kind of person or
that you could have coped with this
particular
um scenario so depression I think a
little bit like the cocaine using that
it has a slightly self-subverting or
self-maintaining aspect uh the sort of
hijacks the normal ways that we get out
of it but just to come back to to this
sort of I think quite fundamental
um uh notion of sort of inducing either
through
um
physiological setting of that resistance
or that what we call Precision so we
call it
um the Precision it's the inverse
uncertainty it's the
um the reliability that you can afford
these ascending prediction errors that
tell you you've got to change your mind
um you've got to find a new way of
coping
um either in a marital relationship or
or just in terms of where you're
actually looking you know from you know
many many different levels so this
notion of precision translates into
exactly what the neuromodulators control
which is the excitability of the
neuronal cells that are broadcasting the
prediction errors to the next level and
as such that looks very much like a
tension in in the you know we were
talking before about sort of um change
blindness and we just don't seem to be
able to attend to things that are very
relevant to the extent we don't even
notice changes when they occur if that
we don't we don't assign them the right
kind of informativeness or salience or
Precision that is necessary to to
explain the narrative that's unfolding
before us so one way of reading this
sort of
um this state this certain urgent State
uh or Continuum where these high-level
uh hierarchy higher level beliefs are
recalcitrant or insensitive to the lower
level information is the remarkable and
important capacity to ignore stuff that
is irrelevant
and what you're saying is when it
happens three times perhaps I shouldn't
be ignoring it anymore and I now have to
redeploy the Precision the neural
refocus my neuromodulatory system
perhaps away from serotonin at the top
and perhaps more to say acetylcholine at
the bottom just given the anatomy of
these neurotransmitter systems that
would indeed render me in a state where
I'm now much more attentive to what's
actually going on out there and what is
actually going on out there will have uh
will engender prediction errors that
will change my mind or indeed change my
my generative model that you know that
entails this hierarchical structure so I
think everything you've said makes
perfect sense from the perspective of
the mechanics of belief updating and
structure learning and in the brain seen
through the lens of an engineer who
thinks about the brain as a predictive
processing or coding machine so what
does acetylcholine do what does
acetylcholine do and you you contrasted
acetylcholine with serotonin and you you
Associated acetylcholine with increased
Precision of attention focused outward
and and that's at the lower levels of
the hierarchy yeah so this is a vast
simplification but
um I think it's a sort of a useful
mnemonic so if you if you think about
the hierarchy that were that that you
were describing before and you now want
to
um discriminate between uh a situation
where all my high level beliefs are um
insensitive to changes at the lower
level so this would be say the the
dominant alpha male very very
self-confident has very precise what we
sometimes in a Bayesian reading of this
predictive coding scheme called prior
beliefs primarilies this is the way I
behave this is the way you behave and I
am going to realize instantiate those
um those fantasies by behaving in this
way and indeed that's what normally
happens so I'm very confident and that
translates into a high degree of Prior
Precision which could be mediated by
things like serotonin the equivalent
neurotransmitter at the lower level is
often
um just looking at the neuroanatomy and
the neurochemistry and physiological
experiments there's a similar role might
be played by acetylcholine
um so you can think of if you like too
much pry Precision
um as being mediated by searchinergic
neurotransmission and of course you know
as well as I do that it's you know it's
a very complicated game with different
receptors subtypes and sort of inverted
you Behavior so I'm not saying it's more
or less but certainly rests upon the way
that you deploy your surgeonergic firing
that will have a profound influence on
the higher level prior beliefs uh
exactly the same kind of role may be
ascribed for cholinergic
neurotransmission from the nucleus
basilis or mine heart which is another
neuromodulator so you've got do dopamine
you've got
serotonin you've got adrenaline or
norepinephrine you have oxytocin there
are lots of them
um and they may all have particular
roles in setting the Precision or the
recalcitrance or the sensitivity at
different hierarchical levels so it's
generally in my world if you like if you
think of Siri turning doing one thing
then the complement of that is that the
the acetylcholines do do in the in the
inverse way so it's a lot like a yin
yang so it because when I talk about
[Music]
um
um attention at the periphery it's
likely that that does uh sorry at the
low level of the hierarchy it's likely
that that does rely upon intactical
anodic neurotransmission with possibly
aberrant serotonergic neurotransmission
that may be due to Psychopathology or it
could be due to taking drugs that affect
say 5h22a receptors like all the
psychedelics you know psilocybins for
example okay so I want to go in I've got
three directions to go in now the first
question that's been lurking in the back
of my mind for a while is
okay when you make progress towards a
valued goal let's say we inhabit a
shared narrative and we're making
progress towards our mutual stated goal
and when we see ourselves making
progress we get a bit of a dopamine hit
could you say that the fundamental
reason
for the positively rewarding effect of
that movement forward is that as I move
forward towards a goal I decrease the
entropy that still remains between me
and the goal and so is even that reward
is even that movement forward readable
as an entropy reduction yeah absolutely
because I'm closer now so there's
okay okay so so I mean see I didn't know
I didn't understand that before okay
okay that I mean it's it's almost
written into the uh the mathematical
meaning of the word so if entropy just
is uncertainty and as I get close to
resolving that uncertainty getting my
fruit juice pleasing my wife or you know
being able to watch the news uh you know
if it's an epistemic reward it is just
expected surprise just is the
uncertainty and the closer you get the
the more
um the less uncertain you are and all
they have to discussed exactly partly
because the
well the closer you get
the fewer things you have to compute in
order to get there so that's a good
working definition of entropy it's like
I have to do less I have to handle less
doubt
between me and my eventual destination
so without okay so that's cool so that
reduces dopaminergic reward to a subset
of entropy reduction
right and we should point out you know
living creatures are always fighting
entropy they're trying to violate the
laws of thermodynamics in some not
fundamentally but in some local sense by
insisting upon the maintenance of order
in the face of this proclivity for
things to go every which way at once
and so all right so movement towards
movement forward towards a shared goal
that's also going to reduce the entropy
between us say because it means if I can
rely on you to be to accompany me as I
move forward that means I can predict
you better it also means that both of us
are now in a situation that's less
entropic because there's less
variability between you and me and the
joint us and that shared goal and so
I've fortified my belief in your
reliability and I've reduced my
apprehension of your entropy yep a
physicist would love that because of
course the nice thing about entropy and
free energy which you know we're here
sort of reading as surprise and
prediction errors
um is an extensive quantity so your free
energy and my free energy or your
entropy and my entropy
um we just have to add them together
because they're extensive and then our
free energy
um is exactly the summer of our free
energy so if we can both both render are
mutual worlds more predictable and less
surprising than our joint free energy
will um will fall
um and this you know this is if you like
um it could be read as a
um a statement of imperatives but you
could also read it another one a much
more deflationary way that stuff Society
is through to cells that exist are just
these
um free energy minimizing systems so you
know these conversations are just the
kinds of conversations that that can
only be there simply because there are
free energy minimizing and
um if you like are what is left when you
wanted to say you know resisting the
second law of Thermodynamics the very
fact that that we are here having this
low free energy conversation and this
exchange and rendering everything
mutually predictable and resolving
uncertainty about ourselves means that
this little dyadic exchange is in itself
a free energy minimizing for the energy
minimizing system and you know free
energy here again is just being used as
a uh proxy for uncertainty for uh
unpredictability uh disorder
um so by minimizing free energy by we
are implicitly going to be minimizing
the disorder and the entropy and the
expected surprise so it's all very
consistent with the physics of
self-organization what you're doing
though I think is thinking about what
would these things look like in a social
context in a dyadic context and just
just to say also that one way of reading
what you're saying about you know well
if we can both shorten the path to a
state of orderly predictiveness and
uncertainty resolution
um then
um if one thinks about that in a you
know in terms of interactions either
between people or between between people
and their environment then you've got
now a nice model for Niche construction
and uh cultural Niche construction that
you know everything I do is in the
service of making everything more
predictable and if that involves
um
um evolving to have a language and to
teach my children language then there's
you know even that aspect of very very
high level
um Niche construction or in cultural
acting upon the world to make it
um in an uncultured way
more learnable and more predictable is
all in the service and minimizing this
this
um entropy anxiety or free energy
uncertainty sorry I'm such anxiety there
I shouldn't do that anxiety I think it
would be our remarkable capacity to
recognize that we haven't resolved our
uncertainty uh in the way that we would
normally expect to and that would be the
situation where the dopamine just goes
away
so how do you view the role of Gaba and
so that's one question another question
is I've spent a fair bit of time
thinking about hemispheric
specialization and I'm wondering if is
it is there any reason to make the
assumption that
does the left hemisphere specialize in
some sense for precision or does it
specialize for
instantiating certainty at the lower
levels of the hierarchy whereas the
right hemisphere is involved in play at
the higher levels is that is there
anything to any of those Concepts that
you know of and you know it's a very
interesting question
um and now I'm sort of speaking as a
sort of Imaging neuroscientist about
functionality I mean I mean
um
first of all if we just go back to what
we're talking about before which is that
the other cybernetic View and the good
regulator theorem
um and the notion that we are well we
entail good models of our lived world or
at least our sensed World
um than having two hemispheres tells me
immediately that there is some
um lateral symmetry in my lived world
and of course that tells me that because
that is true in the sense I have two
arms and two legs uh you know if my
world certainly has a newborn it's
basically you know 99 my body
um I think the sort of having two
hemispheres tells you something quite
fundamental about about the universe
into which you are
um as a brain at least
um introduced just to generalize that
what that means is if you gave me the
brain of a Martian I should be able to
tell you a lot about its lived world and
its embodiment and its body and the kind
of world that it lives in just by
looking at the structure the anatomy of
the brain so I think that you know
there's an important aspect to that sort
of lateralization issue
um a more I think a sort of more
um scholarly and and but more specific
answer to your question is that there is
certainly
um in neuropsychology
um an asymmetry in the way we deploy
attention so if you now read the
deployment of certain neuromodulators
such as say serotonin or acetylcholine
or indeed um adrenaline
um as instantiating endogenous attention
then its deficits will correspond to
certain kinds of neglect the
pathological inability to attend to I.E
you're always going to ignore or just
not be aware of this and of course
there's a really interesting work in
terms of hem neglects systems and
bilateral asymmetries between the right
and the left parietal cortex in these
same
so I do I don't know very much beyond
that other than to be able to say that
um for
um for reasons that uh must have a
principal explanation in terms of the
the other high order causal structure of
the worlds in which we operate there
certainly is some asymmetry in the way
that we attend two things or the some
benefit in terms of having that
factorization
um that allows certain
um things to attend to that this set you
know just set the sensitivity or the
um the flexibility or inflexibility of a
hierarchy construction
um it must be the case that there are
certain domains and certain attributes
that do show this um this lateralization
and just to point out also of course
that the lateralization issue was quite
hot in the days of um of gray at the at
the Mosley as an uh as a possible
correlative things like schizophrenia
yeah well I mean Goldberg who is a
student of lurius so suggested that the
right hemisphere was specialized for
processing in the domain of novelty and
the left hemisphere was specialized for
processing in the domain of relative
certainty and so it might be something
like the more novel it is the more
likely the right is to attend to it and
that sort of maps on to
Gilchrist mcgilchrist's
conceptualization of hemispheric
specialization with regards to both
predation and Predator detection it's
the right hemisphere seems to be
specialized for contextual evaluation
and the spotting of predators and the
left for focused attention in the
service of predation so a bird for
example will attend preferentially with
the prey detection system while eating
but the right Hemisphere and the other
eye are scanning the environment for
signs of context-dependent signs of
predation on the bird okay I didn't know
I didn't know that that's very
interesting so I was just thinking of
course the the obvious example of
lateralization is language and if you
look at language as
um really
um protection for information so if you
think of language as the way of asking
questions that is the tool that we use
to predate for information so that makes
entire sense I didn't know that about
the and the comparative ethology and
anatomy of of of
um of predators but uh um yeah well
gilchrist's new work mcgilchrist's new
work details that out in in some at some
length the the relationship between
attentional breadth and focus and
hemispheric specialization it's quite
nice and it Maps very nicely onto the
concepts that we've been discussing
today so shall we take a brief foray
into psychedelics
and then we'll have to close this part
of the conversation unfortunately
although there's about 50 other things
I'd like to discuss with you but well
that's I guess we've covered a fair bit
of territory for one day but I'd be I'm
very interested in
your conception of the relationship
between say psychedelic experience and
it's antithesis in some sense if I've
got this right with the action of
antidepressants
yes well yeah I'm not sure it's um an
antithesis because
um you know there are
um in the past few years and indeed
months um an increasing number of papers
looking at sort of
um uh 5h2a agonists and partial agonists
and and drugs act upon the social urgent
system namely psychedelics and their
ability to remediate certain conditions
that that would have you know a
pronounced um usually pronounced
effective state so I I the game is very
complicated but what we certainly uh
know at the moment is that the actions
of psychedelics
um from the point of view of their
definitive
um
effects on the brain namely you know the
the abnormal perception uh
um and the um characteristic way that
you you can't attend from the
microstructure
um of your Sensations we we do now know
that that
um is probably
um best explained when I say we know we
conjecture that it is nicely explained
by exactly the same kind of mechanism
you were talking about before which is a
sort of changing the balance of
recalcitrance or Precision or
sensitivity
um away from these high level uh
constructs deep in the hierarchy at the
top of the hierarchy and
reinvesting that kind of precision or
um sensitivity
um under predictive coding models to
prediction errors much lower in the
hierarchy so this would look basically
like I'm now going to ignore my prior
beliefs about about the narrative uh
that I'm currently committed to in terms
of this interaction and I'm just going
to focus in on you know what can I sense
so you're talking before about sort of
um a mother's
um predisposition to viserys sensitive
to cues that could engage or could
represent really important affordances
for responding right responding to a
baby crying so this would be you know
one way of viewing the effects of
psychedelics that you are forced to by
reducing or relaxing the Precision of
the high level beliefs in relation to
the lower level
um evidence or belief updating or
evidence accumulation you are putting
yourself in an intentional set
where everything is interesting you
can't attend away from it it's a very
Elemental level and it Disturbed me that
this is you know very very similar to
what you were talking about before in
terms of the
um you know
and neuroticism I presume this as sort
of an iron sink like uh constrict
um where you know you would have some
people who are just Jolly confident that
their prior beliefs are the most apt
explanation and they will ignore lots of
evidence to the contrary simply by
suppressing the Precision or the
importance or turning down the gain on
on that kind of thing but you can't do
that if you get more than three uh
errors that you can't explain so you
know there is an adaptability
um built into our brains that will
actually say well no actually let's just
attend to these lower level ones and at
that point you're gonna have to relax
the higher level and become more
flexible and more adaptive well that
okay so that ability to relax at that
level seems to be
indexed by the personality trait
openness and open people are more
creative and so creative people have
more play in the higher order
conceptualizations and one of the
solid empirical findings emerging out of
the research on psilocybin is that a
single mystical experience induced by
psilocybin produces something
approximating a one standard deviation
increase in trade openness that's
permanent
it never goes away
yeah yeah and so it doesn't look exactly
like it's a reduction in
or say an increase in neuroticism so
that error messages can propagate upward
it's it's something akin to that because
if you're more open than
there's more play in the system but it
doesn't seem to be tied exactly to error
per se a negative emotion and I can't
puzzle out the distinction exactly right
because if you're high in neuroticism
you're going to propagate error messages
but then things are going to collapse if
you're high in openness the error
message is propagate but you generate
alternative theorems at a very rapid
rate in order to
re-contextualize the anomaly I I didn't
know that that is very interesting so I
think then it's the openness that I was
talking to and certainly that's the the
aspiration
um or the motivation behind the the use
of these uh chemicals in say end of life
care or indeed in terms of yeah
Psychotherapy it's really to open you up
to new possibilities well maybe with
creative people what you see so imagine
category rigidity and category rigidity
might be something like the probability
that activation of one category will
activate adjacent categories
so imagine that constraint is the
constraint of openness the more open you
are the more flexible those boundaries
the more when you activate one category
you're going to co-activate a network of
associated categories so then imagine
you dump psilocybin into the system and
what happens is the barriers between
adjacent categories become more
permeable and so then as information
propagates up there's more play in the
systems because the category boundaries
have become wider and that would
increase your probability of a false
certainty right which is on an idea
derived from Insight that's wrong but it
would also increase the probability that
you'd get some true positives out of the
deal which is really what creative
people are doing all the time a lot of
creative ideas just aren't functional
but some are crucial
and so it's a high risk High return
cognitive strategy in some sense to
generate to have looser categories or
more co-activation of categories at the
higher levels and certainly that is akin
to what people report in psychedelic
experiences that ideas flood in on them
and they see how things are connected in
ways they couldn't perceive before and
so
that's different than the flexibility
that high neuroticism in some sense
produces because that's more like the
probability that a conceptual system
will collapse rather than it then it
will expand
but your your
um use of the word barriers I think is
is very nice
um and I'm just wondering and certainly
I think you'd enjoy speaking to Robin
kaha Harris who who
um has has described
um I think effectively what you've just
described but instead of um casting it
in terms of jumping through barriers
um he um would describe it really as a
reduction in the height of a barrier so
you if you can imagine
um and it's um in my world it would
literally be a free energy landscape and
our ideas are our prior beliefs are
basically sitting at the Minima at the
bottom of a well
um and sometimes we can get stuck in a
rut I see
um yeah and you know for example you say
I was depressed or I had the hypothesis
I am going to die and this is how
um things that are going to die behave
um and this is how I'm going to behave
and that may not be the most functional
way of that kind of
end of life self modeling that by making
the barriers more permeable simply by
reducing the um their height you can you
now enabler jumping from one Minima to
another Minima to explore more options
exactly in the spirit that you meant in
terms of creativity but it could be
creativity about other ways of being me
in this situation and that flattening of
the landscape is just you know one way
mathematically of writing down the
reduction in the Precision or the
rigidity of these high level beliefs
probably is relative to the to the to
the lower ones so I think there's a
beautiful conciliency there okay so so
that would imply that that would imply
as those walls come down let's say that
it would require less novelty
propagating up the system to produce a
phase change exactly yeah
yeah okay okay okay well I'm afraid we
have to bring this part of this
conversation to a close even though I
don't want to uh there's there's other
topics I would love to discuss with you
I would very much appreciate it if you
would consider putting me in touch with
is it Carhartt Harris indeed yes I will
do that yes yes because I I know some of
the papers that you've written jointly
um and I would like to discuss those
further
um
I would maybe I'd close with an
observation if you don't mind is that
one of the most functional narratives as
far as I can tell is predicated on the
idea that you should conduct yourself in
a manner that leaves you open to
exposing yourself to information that
will allow you to update your narratives
right so it's a weird loop it's like
well
narrative itself is dependent on
exploration and so the best narrative in
the most fundamental sense is one that
leaves the option of exploration
continually open and that's something
like a voluntary confrontation with the
anomalies that characterize existence as
the central pattern of adaptive being
it's something like that and that's
existence on that border between Chaos
and Order in some fundamental sense so
anyways I appreciated the conversation
very much it would be fun to meet in
person sometime I think we could
probably talk for about 36 hours and uh
I'll be in London again in January and
so maybe maybe we could meet then if
you'd be amenable to that and in the
meantime I would like to let everybody
watching and listening know that I'm
going to continue my conversation with
Dr friston for half an hour on the DW
plus site I like to go behind the scenes
with people and to investigate the
process by which their narrative
unfolded the process by which they made
their path through life their successful
path through life because I think it's
very useful to for people to be provided
with models of how that occurs
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com